CHAPTER THREE
Demi na Mathathi were giants of the tribe. They had lived a long way back, at the beginning 
of time. They cut down trees and cleared the dense forests for cultivation. They owned 
many cattle, sheep and goats and they often sacrificed to Murungu and held communion 
with the ancestral spirits. Waiyaki had heard about these two generations of the tribe and 
he was proud of them. Only he wished he knew what they had looked like. They must have 
been great and strong to have braved the hazards of the forest.
Sometimes in the bush, he and the other boys played Demi na Mathathi. One day a boy 
from Koina told Waiyaki:
“You cannot be Demi.”
“Why?” he asked. The other boys came round.
“You are not ready for circumcision. You are not born again.”
Waiyaki looked at the ground and felt small. Then he turned to the group and let his eyes 
fall on them. His eyes were large and rather liquid; sad and contemplative. But whenever he 
looked at someone, they seemed to burn bright. A light came from them, a light that 
appeared to pierce your body, seeing something beyond you, into your heart. Not a man 
knew what language the eyes spoke. Only, if the boy gazed at you, you had to obey. That 
half-imploring, half-commanding look was insisting, demanding. Perhaps that was why the 
other boys obeyed him. His mother always turned her eyes away from his. And some 
women and big girls remarked that he made them feel shy. But then women were always 
shy when men’s eyes were on them. Waiyaki was not aware of anything strange in his eyes, 
although sometimes he felt something burn in him, urging him to say and do daring things.
And that day he felt the urge come to him. For a moment he thought himself Demi as he 
answered back.
“But I am Demi.” And then he saw a tree a little distance away. “See if I don’t cut down 
that tree,” he went on. And he took an ax and rushed to the tree, oblivious of everything. He 
began to cut it with all his strength and soon the stick that was the ax fell into pieces. At 
first the other boys had laughed. But they soon followed his example and went around 
cutting down trees and clearing the forest ready for “Cultivation” just like Demi na 
Mathathi.
That day Waiyaki went home and told his mother: “I must be born again.”
• • •
Now the day had come. And when the sun rose and hit the ground and goats scratched 
themselves against the wall, Waiyaki went to the back of the hut and let the rays fall on his 
neck. The burning was pleasant.
Waiyaki wanted to be happy, very happy. Was he not going to learn the ways of the land? 
Was he not going to drink the magic ritual of being born again? He knew he wanted to be 
like his father, knowing all the ways of the land from Agu and Agu, long ago.
But he felt dejected. Something he could not define seemed to gnaw at his soul, having 
first crept through the flesh. He wished Kamau or Kinuthia were there to keep him