CHAPTER ONE
The two ridges lay side by side. One was Kameno, the other was Makuyu. Between them 
was a valley. It was called the valley of life. Behind Kameno and Makuyu were many more 
valleys and ridges, lying without any discernible plan. They were like many sleeping lions 
which never woke. They just slept, the big deep sleep of their Creator.
A river flowed through the valley of life. If there had been no bush and no forest trees 
covering the slopes, you could have seen the river when you stood on top of either Kameno 
or Makuyu. Now you had to come down. Even then you could not see the whole extent of 
the river as it gracefully, and without any apparent haste, wound its way down the valley, 
like a snake. The river was called Honia, which meant cure, or bring-back-to-life. Honia 
river never dried: it seemed to possess a strong will to live, scorning droughts and weather 
changes. And it went on in the same way, never hurrying, never hesitating. People saw this 
and were happy.
Honia was the soul of Kameno and Makuyu. It joined them. And men, cattle, wild beasts 
and trees, were all united by this life-stream.
When you stood in the valley, the two ridges ceased to be sleeping lions united by their 
common source of life. They became antagonists. You could tell this, not by anything 
tangible but by the way they faced each other, like two rivals ready to come to blows in a 
life and death struggle for the leadership of this isolated region.
• • •
It began long ago. A man rose in Makuyu. He claimed that Gikuyu and Mumbi sojourned 
there with Murungu on their way to Mukuruwe wa Gathanga. As a result of that stay, he 
said, leadership had been left to Makuyu. Not all the people believed him. For had it not 
always been whispered and rumored that Gikuyu and Mumbi had stopped at Kameno? And 
had not a small hill grown out of the soil on which they stood south of Kameno? And 
Murungu had told them:
“This land I give to you, O man and woman. It is yours to rule and till, you and your 
posterity.”
The land was fertile. It was the whole of Gikuyu country from one horizon embracing the 
heavens to the other hidden in the clouds. So the story ran in Kameno. Spiritual superiority 
and leadership had then been left there.
Kameno had a good record to bear out this story. A sacred grove had sprung out of the 
place where Gikuyu and Mumbi stood; people still paid homage to it. It could also be seen, 
by any who cared to count, that Kameno threw up more heroes and leaders than any other 
ridge. Mugo wa Kibiro, that great Gikuyu seer of old, had been born there. And he had 
grown up, seeing visions of the future and speaking them to the many people who came to 
see and hear him. But a few, more cynical than their neighbors, would not go to him. They 
called him an impostor. Then one night, when people were asleep, he vanished from the 
hills. “He was soon heard of in the land beyond; in Nyeri, Kiambu, Muranga; in fact all over 
the Gikuyu country. And he still spoke aloud his message and cried: