CHAPTER TWO
The hills and the ridges now lay behind. This was a plain, the only such level stretch of land 
in this country. If you strained your eyes and peered into the misty distance you could see 
the land of Ukabi. It was all peaceful on this plain, which was said to have been a field of 
battle, once long ago. A few cattle pulled and mauled the grass while others lay down 
looking vacantly into space, chewing.
Suddenly, two boys emerged from the bush. They began to fight. One was tall and his 
unusually long neck and limbs made him appear older than he really was. He was Kamau, 
son of Kabonyi from Makuyu. The other, Kinuthia, was shorter with surprisingly strong 
muscles. His slow wide eyes well matched his smooth forehead. He lived with his uncle at a 
village beyond the two ridges away from Makuyu. His father had died early.
At first the boys fought with the sticks they had gone to fetch from the bush. The green 
sticks caught each other in mid-air several times and were soon in pieces. The boys threw 
them away and one piece touched a cow, which stood up quickly, frightened. It moved a 
few paces from the struggling pair, waking two others on the way. Then it looked in the 
opposite direction, unconcerned with the fight.
Kamau and Kinuthia were now wrestling. Their arms were interlocked and the two boys 
went round and round without either getting the better of the other. Kinuthia tried to lift 
Kamau off the ground and then trap him with his right leg. The attempt always failed. 
Kamau had his struggles too. Though not usually voluble, today he was eloquent with 
threats.
“You will know who I am,” he warned, at the same time using his right knee to hit 
Kinuthia’s stomach.
“Cow,” cried Kinuthia with pain.
“Hyena.”
“Even you,” Kinuthia hissed back.
Kinuthia appeared much more collected, and an observer would have thought that he 
would win. But he tripped over a sharp stone and soon was lying prostrate on his stomach. 
Kamau bent over him and pinned Kinuthia’s hands behind his head. His face was grim and 
contorted as he used his head to dig into Kinuthia’s face, making his nose bleed. The boy 
underneath Kamau’s knees felt pain. He thrust his legs in the air hoping to catch Kamau by 
the neck between the legs. Blows fell on him and he was bewildered, not knowing when 
and where the next blow would follow.
Two cows that had moved away together turned their heads and watched the struggle 
for a while. Then they bent their heads, thrusting out their tongues to pull and maul the 
grass like the others.
Just then, another boy came running from a group of cows a distance away.
“Stop fighting!” he shouted breathlessly as he stood near the pair. Kamau stopped, but he 
still sat on Kinuthia.
“Why are you fighting?”
“He called me names,” answered Kamau.